Today, we're going to talk about regular
expressions. Now, this is another in the
series of ingenious algorithms that we're
looking at in the second half of this
course. Now, this is really one of the
most widely used and one of the coolest
algorithms that we're going to cover. to
get started, we have to talk about what is
a regular expression. And just putting the
problem in context we've always talked
about before. in the last lecture, we
talked about the substring search problem,
which we're just trying to find one string
in a text. Now, we'll talk about a more
general problem, a pattern matching
problem, where we find one of a specified
set of strings in the decks. So, that's
specified set. rather than talk about one
string, we have to describe a set of
strings. And that's what regular
expressions are all about. here's an
example from genomics, an actual example
from a real life scientific data
processing. So, there's a thing called
Fragile X syndrome, which is a common
cause of mental retardation. the human
genome contains is a string that consists
of Cs, Ts, As, and Gs, it's the way we've
talked about before. and the, they
naturally group themselves into groups of
three. And there's a way to describe a
correlation with the syndrome from a
property of the text string or the genome
string. the, the actual scientific data is
shown over here on the right, but we'll
just work with the text strings. In the in
the English, the description is that
you've got somewhere in your genome
repeats of either CGG or AGG, that are
bracketed by GCG at the beginning and CTG
at the end. Now, the number of repeats
inside is very well. So in this case,
we've got GCJ that's the beginning thing
and then we've got a CGG that's one, AGG
that two, CGG that's three. So, we got
three repeats on one of these two patterns
and then we have CTG. now, a different
genome might have many more of these
triplet patterns inside the number of
repeats is a variable but high, high
repeat is correlated with Fragile X
syndrome. So, clearly medical p
rofessionals want to know, given a genome
does it have a high number of repeats with
this kind of pattern? then we if so then
we want to look out for this Fragile X
syndrome. And the specifying the problem
in English is one thing, but specifying it
in a way that is enable to writing a
program to help us find these patterns is
another. and this is the way that we
specify the pattern. Now, this thing is
called a regular expression. Let's take
this CGG, and then either a CGG, GCG, and
then either a CGG or an AGG any number of
times followed by a CGG. that's specifying
a set of strings and we might find that if
the text had one of that specified set.
here's another example where regular
expressions appear in real life. there's a
new source highlight program that we use
to highlight syntax, highlight keywords in
our, in our text, and, and also gray out
comments, and so forth. and this is a very
general program that works for many
different kinds of languages and outputs
to many different print formats. and
that's all about identifying one of a
specified set of strings in a text and
doing something with it. It's an
application of regular expressions in real
life. in Google, you can search in public
search code, it's public source code for
regular expression search so you can
search for code that contains any one of a
specified set of strings. and that's
available facility on the web. There's
many, many other applications. Another one
is PROSITE in Biology. there is a bunch of
specified patterns that you can use to
search for genome or processing ahm
natural language, it's all about string
processing and specifying sets of strings,
programming languages themselves. and the
other one we'll look at later on is
validating when you are getting data entry
from the web when you type in a credit
card number, you are told whether it's
legal or not and that's all done with
regular expressions since the string you
typed in one of the specified sets. so,
this is very widely used and widely useful
application. so we're going to look into
the more general idea that this brings
out, is the idea of parsing text files,
and not only finding if the string matches
a pattern, but finding if finding the
structure of a string that we can use in
some kind of beneficial way. And we'll
come back to it more. so, we're looking at
a basic capability that's widely useful,
but it also extends to cover deep issues
and processes in Computer Science. So,
what is a regular expression? Well, it's
simply a notation to specify a set of
strings. the set could be infinite. we're
going to specify it with a finite pattern
but it, it could be infinite. And we make
a regular expression up just from four
simple operations. first one is called
concatenation. so, that's we just take a
bunch of letters and put them, one after
the other and a regular expression made
from concatenation matches exactly
precisely the sequence of characters that
are specified and it doesn't match
anything else. So, that's a simple one by
itself and that's what we use for
substring search for example. then there's
or. so that one, we give two different
regular expressions and put a vertical bar
between them. And that says we're
specifying now a set of size two and we're
happy to match either string in that set.
there's no other string that we match. and
then there's one called closure. And this
is where an infinite comes in. so, when we
put a star after a character, or a regular
expression, as we'll see, that's
specifying zero or more occurrences of
that character. So, AA matches AB<i>A
because that's zero occurrences of B in</i>
between. Or A with eight Bs followed by an
A matches, because that's got zero or more
Bs in between two As. but if you don't
have an A at the beginning and the end, or
if you don't have all Bs inside, that
doesn't match. And that's an infinite
number of strings, zero on any number of
occurrences of B. So, with just four
characters were specifying an infinite set
of strings. and then, the next operation
to allow us to build regular expressions
of arbitrary complexity is si mply
parentheses. if you include regular
expressions within a parentheses, then you
can apply the star operator or
concatenation to a, another regular
expression. So, these are examples of
regular expressions using parentheses. So,
this says, A and then what's inside the
parentheses, which is the regular
expression that says either A or B and
then followed by AAB. So, that matches
precisely these two strings. either A
followed by an A followed by AB or A
followed by B followed by AAA and it
doesn't match anything else. or if you put
a more complicated regular expression
inside parenthesis with a star, it still
means zero or more occurrences. So, just A
would be zero occurrences. and then, this
is one, two, three, four occurrences of AB
followed by A. And again, if it's not of
that form, it doesn't match. this one
doesn't have AB, and, and neither does
this, it has one AB, but then the next one
would have to be either AB or A. There's
been a way to get one of these strings by
including zero more occurrences of AB.
these things here are, are precedence
order when we're performing the
operations. so the first thing is
parenthesis, next thing is a star, next
thing is concatenation and finally the or
operation. In this table then completely
specifies what we mean by regular
expression. It's a sequence of characters.
alphabet characters like A and B and
metacharacters, like or and star and
parenthesis that we use to describe a
possibly infinite set of strings. Now in
the real world it's often worthwhile and,
and useful to add some additional
operations for convenience. for example,
the wild card operation needs to have a
dot and another metacharacter that matches
any letter at all. and that's shorthand
for listing all the letters separated by
or and then but that's a lot of characters
and so, with one character, we can match
the same regular expression. and so this
one you can use like to solve a crossword
puzzle, for example. this one matches all
the words that will have alternating U
with all the seven letter words that have
alternating Us. and so there's a couple.
but there's some other ones tha sort of
have alternating use, but not quite. And
they don't match, so it's a wild card
character. and then, there's classes of
character, so capital A-Z means any
capital letter. and then a-z means any
lower case letter. so any capitalized
letter, any lower case letter followed by
any number of lower case letters will
match something like this but it won't
match something like that, just classes of
characters. And again, this is shorthand
for typing all the characters and using or
at least one. So, rather than star, which
says, zero or more occurrences, plus means
one or more occurrences. so that's another
example of a convenient shorthand or
exactly K putting in braces that I want to
specify, this specifies I want exactly
five digits, followed by a dash, followed
by exactly four digits. So, that's a way
to specify, you know, something like a
legal plus for zip code. and it doesn't
match other things. now in, in practice,
in, in, in terms of practical clients
these types of shorthands are extremely
important in terms of the theory and the
idea of processing regular expressions
since we can specify them all with the
basic operations we'll pretty much ignore
them in our code. so, in every, in every
case we could write [A-E] + if we wanted
we could write this longhand of it, but of
course users are going to write the
shorthand. but still, if we have a
mechanism for dealing with this, then we
can certainly take care of the shorthand.
so, just with those basic operations and,
and also the shorthand is helpful and our
notation is amazingly expressive. There's
really a lot you can do with it. so, for
example, you can do substring search with
a regular expression. one way to express
the substring search problem is to put
your string preceded by dot star and put a
dot star at the end, you know, and that's
asking if your string is in the infinite
language described by this regular
expression, is equivalent to the substring
search problem. It matches if and only, if
that string is in there so, for example,
in these two and not in that two so
notation covers the substring search
problem. But then also, it can specify
easily useful sets of strings that, that,
you know, that we often want to check. So
this is similar to the zip plus four, the
three digits followed by a dash followed
by two digits, followed by a dash,
followed by four digits. that's a good
start towards knowing whether the string
is a legal Social Security Number or not.
Or is it a legal e-mail address or not.
this is a simplified version but it
basically says, you ought to have at least
one letter followed by an @, followed by
some letters, followed by a dot, followed
by edu or com or of course to cover all
e-mail addresses, you need to consider
some more possibilities. but this is a, a
quick and succinct way to specify a set of
string or Java identifier, what's a legal
Java identifier. so, this is one way to
specify legal Java identifier. And indeed,
programming languages like Java use
regular expressions like this to define
what they mean by a legal identifier, and
then, the kinds of processes that we're
going to talk about to actually check that
what you typed is legal and echoes all the
way up to the program itself. the, you
know, is, is this a legal Java program?
It's almost but not quite, as we'll see in
regular expression pattern matching
problem. Very, very expressive in a
widely-used language. Now, what's, what's
really interesting about this topic and
we'll just I, I touch on it, even though
it's extremely important to what we're
going to do is that just from the
standpoint of the theory of computation
starting with the, the time of Turing and
others in the 30s', our regular
expressions play an important role in our
understanding of the theory of computation
and that understanding actually has led to
that algorithm that we're going to talk
about. That's a very interesting aspect of
this. but still, even given that you know,
regular expressions are just useful in
everyday life. this is an example of
someone that used the regular expression
to screen a job candidate. and, and this
is actually illegal to look for words like
Enron, or Kerry, or Bush or Gore or
Republican. to decide whether a, a, a job
candidate's job application will get
through. This one uses an exclamation
point, which mean just end with anything.
it's like dot star. so someone, a typical
computer user can learn to regular
expressions to with great effect. even
Google supports, a regular Google search
window supports a star as a full word wild
card and or for union. Although not full
regular expression pattern matching.
although that day is surely coming. so
people who just get into it just a little
bit and start to see the utility of
regular expressions certainly get excited
about it. And you can find examples of
this all through the web. this is an X,
XKCD comic about it where there's a
problem, you know, how can we search
through 200 megabytes of emails looking
for something formated like an address.
And lawyers want to do this all the time
nowadays, and it's hopeless. But now, I
know regular expressions. and the regular
expression super being swoops to the
rescue and types a regular expression in
Perl, which is a, a widely-used language
that's based on regular expressions that
we'll talk about briefly in a minute and
swoops away. So, there is somewhat of a
feeling what people don't know just a
little bit that regular expressions can be
used to solve any problem. that's not
quite true as we know from the theory of
computation and we'll also touch on that a
little bit. so the, the question is, can
the average programmer learn to use
regular expressions effectively? And
there's all kinds of evidence out there
that lots of programmers use, use in
extensively. But not to pour cold water on
it but we have to take everything with
some restraint. And here's an example of a
regular expression that you can find out
on the web. it's written in Perl, but it's
a regular expression to check whether an
-email address is va lid or not. now, that
is quite a regular expression. and one
might argue whether that's really an
effective way to use regular expressions.
Maybe there's a simpler and easier way to
check for valid e-mail, e-mail addresses.
but anyway, this one is out there and is
used probably being used efficiently
somewhere to the end, effectively
somewhere today. but, but really for
people who are educated in, in Computer
Science, need to know that regular
expressions are definitely powerful tools,
but writing in regular expression really
is like writing a program. you have, you
have to understand the underlying
programming model. It's so often even more
so than many programming languages since
there's so few rules, it's easier to write
a regular expression than it is to read
one. And if it's difficult to read, it
means it's difficult to debug. and so, you
can find a lot of flaming on the web about
this. and this is a particular apt,
particularly apt quote. Some people, when
confronted with a problem I think I know,
I'll use regular expressions. Now, they
have two problems. And I think that's a
good way to summarize the bottom line.
That regular expressions are amazingly
powerful and expressive. But you can, they
can get very complex in real in real
applications. still, there's plenty of
real applications where they can be
succinct and effective. And so, we're
going to look next at regular expression
pattern matching algorithms.
