Now, first we're going to look at the
process of simulating the operation of an
NFA. And in order to do that, we have to
look at the representation. so for state
names we're just going to use the integers
from zero to N and those are just indexes
into the regular expression strain with
one extra one for the except state. So, if
RE has M characters, we've got M plus one
states. and then, we forget the
match-transitions. so for with this, we'll
just keep the regular expression in an
array. and then for characters that are
not metacharacters that are just
characters from the alphabet there's
match-transition just to the next element
just to add one, so that's an implicit
representation of the match-transitions.
and then the next thing is the epsilon
transitions. So, since there might be
multiple edges leaving from any given
state and it is directed, it always says,
go from this state to another one we'll
use directed graph. So we just have a
bunch of edges with given vertex names.
And that's convenient. That's what we use
for our graph processing algorithms, was
indexes for vertex names. so, this is
totally well-suited to building a digraph
using the basic digraph processing methods
that we talked about when doing graph
processing. so, that's our representation
and then given that representation it's
very, you know, straightforward to find
out for any state what are the possible
next states and if it's got a character in
a possible next state is to match a
character in angle up one otherwise it's
the vertices that they are pointed to by
the edges and its adjacency list does have
epsilon transitions. So, let's take a look
at just given that basic idea, that we can
always get to the transition from any
given state how we're going to do a
simulation? and so, the idea is summarized
by this diagram here. what, what we're
going to do is at every step each text
character that the machine does read,
we're going to keep track of the, the set
of all possible states where the NFA could
be after reading in the i, I text ch
aracter.
So, say, we've done that and, you know,
there's this is just a schematic. So,
there's a bunch of states that we could
get to after reading i characters. Now in
some of those states they, they are
labeled with characters. and if that
character matches our text character, they
can take us to another state. So, say, in
this case, there is three of them that
matches and the other one has some other
character or different character and it
couldn't take us to another state. So,
that gives us a all the possible states
that you could be in just after reading
the i plus first symbol. And now, what we
do is take a look at the possible null
transitions that we could go to from those
states. And that might take us to lots of
other states. but that's all the machine
could do. It could read a character. And
then it can take a bunch of null
transitions. and but that's all it knows
how to do. And that will give us all the
possible states that it could be in after
reading i1 plus one symbols. And then, we
just continue in that from every one of
those states. some of them match the
character match the character, and then,
look at all the epsilon transitions. So,
that's the basic idea is to simply keep
track of all possible states the NFA could
be in after reading the first i text
characters. so the only thing that's
complicated is how do we get all the
states that we could reach by epsilon
transition. and we'll look at that in just
a second. It's actually very
straightforward. But let's look at a demo
first. so this is our machine for A<i>B or
A, or AC followed by D. and let's suppose</i>
it has this input. So, let's do this demo.
Okay. So, we're going to, to check if the
input is matching the pattern. we're going
to start the machine in state zero and so
the zero is one of the states, you could
reach from the start. and then now we want
to get to all the states that you could
reach by epsilon transitions from the
start. and so there's a bunch of them so
we could go to one and from one, we could
go to either two or six. from two, we
could go to three. From three, we could go
to two or four. so we could get to all
those places from the start without
scanning a single character. So, zero,
one, two, three, four, and six the machine
could be in any one of those states before
it scans a single character. so, that's
where it could be after zero characters.
But what about now after the first
character? Well, out of those states only
two and six involve matching an A. So the
only thing that could happen next to read,
the machine could do next, is to read the
A in either state two or state six. I know
there's going to be match-transitions. So
in the first case, it goes to three and,
and the second case, it goes to seven. So,
the stead of states, it can be reachable
just after matching the A, is just three
and seven. But now from those states it
might get somewhere with epsilon
transitions. We have to look at the
epsilon transition graphs and what states
could it go to from epsilon transitions
from these two. well, from three, seven
has nowhere to go, and from three it could
go either to two or four. from two, it
could go back to three so the total number
states that it could be after matching A
is two, three, four, and seven. and so
that's one step. We've matched one
character, and we have kept track of all
possible states the machine could be in
after matching that character. Now, what
about the next character? You can see,
these four states take us all different
ways. You could have an A, a B, or a C
next, and it could get somewhere. But it
happens, we have an A, and the only one of
these states that matches an A is two. So,
after matching the second A the only place
it could get to is three. and so that now,
we have only one state to work with. But
where could we get with via epsilon
transitions, from three? and so, well, you
can go from three to four or two. Well, we
did this before. And then, from two back
to three. So, we could be in two, three,
or four after matching two As. so that's
all the possible states we could be in
after mat ch, after matching the two As.
now, what's next is B, only state four
matches to B, so the only place we could
be right after matching the B is in state
five. And that's after matching the B, now
what about epsilon transitions? Well,
state five has an epsilon transition to
state eight. so we could take that one and
eight has got one to nine. So it could be
an either five, eight, or nine after
matching AAB and then following all of the
epsilon transitions. but its really
important to keep in mind, there's no
other state the machine could be and it
doesn't have any other way to get to after
matching AAB it couldn't get state seven
or six or two. those are the only possible
states it could be in. since we're, each
time, progressing through the input we're
making progress to the end for sure. So
now to finish up this example the only
state out of those three that matches D is
state nine. and so, that's a
match-transition that reads the D. and the
only place you could be after matching
AABD is state ten. and then now, we follow
epsilon transitions. and that Epsilon
transition could take us to eleven. so,
the only place that machine could be after
matching ABD is ten or eleven. Now, our
condition on whether we accept the string
or not is whether we could get to the
accept state, and in this case, we could.
it is possible for the machine to get from
zero to the accept state and read all the
input characters so that simulation is
approved, that the machine accepts the
input AABD when simulated its operation,
all possible ways and we managed to find
the accept state. Of course, if we had
tried some input that the machine doesn't
recognize, we'd get stuck somewhere and
either not get through the input or have
no possible states it could be in. and
that would be a proof that it does not
accept since we try all possibilities. So,
the only thing that's complicated in this
computation is reachability. but actually
from our study of digraphs this is the,
one of the simplest problems that we
discussed. what we really discussed was
single source reachability. That is given
the source, can you find all vertices that
are reachable from that source? And that
was Depth Firts Search. so we have very
simple depth first search but also in that
API we put vertices reachable from a set
of sources, so an iterable of sources and
so can we get the, the, what we really
need is all vertices reachable from a
given source from its source set of
vertices. and it's easy using DFS. You
just run it from each of the sources and
you don't unmark the ones that you get to
and that stops DFS from revisiting any
vertices and it marks all the vertices
that you could get to from that set. So,
its just a simple extension of our DFS
implementation. it's going to run in time
proportional to the number of edges plus
number of vertices in the digraph and it's
a very simple computation digraph
reachability. so given that capability
which we discussed in graph processing the
implementation of in a, in the NFA
stimulation is very straightforward. so
this is a, a data type that implements the
NFA. so, we have a constructor that takes
a regular expression as its argument. and
it's going to build the NFA and its got a,
a method to build the digraph that we'll
talk about later but, but its also got a,
a client method recognizes where the
client can after the NFA is constructed,
it can that they could text string and
return true or false by simulating the
operation. so we'll take a look at the
building the digraph in a second but the
one that we're talking about now is
simulating the operation of the NFA once
it's built for a given text string. and
this is the complete code and it's
expresses in code what we talked about in
English during the demo. it's amazingly
compact implementation of this idea of
simulating the operation of an NFA. So we
keep a, a bag of integers or set of
integers called PC, that's kind of like
program counter. So, that's the set of all
possible states that the NFA could be in.
so and we build a DFS from our epsilon
transition graph. so the first thing that
we do is do a, a, a for we put on to the,
the PC all the states that you could get
to from state zero. so that's build a DFS
that marks all the states you could get to
from state zero and then go through and
put all of the states on, on to the PC.
So, that's our starting point, is all the
places that you could get to via epsilon
transitions from state zero. So now during
the execution of this for loop PC is the
thing that we have all the states that you
could reach after scanning past the ith
character, so we initialize for the 0th
character. And then all we do is for
everyone one of those states well, first
thing we do is test if we reach the accept
state. If we reach the accept state we're
going to have nothing, we're, we have
nothing left to do. if we have a match,
that is, if the a character in the RE if
that state position matches our ith text
character, then we're going to keep
another set of possible states called
match. So, those are the ones you could
get to just after matching a text
character. And so, we'll just add V. plus
one. So, if we find a matching character
at V, we just go to V plus one, that's the
implicit match-transition. and here, we'll
throw in, don't care, cuz it's so easy to
do if the regular, regular expressions
says, I don't care what character matches
then throw that one to. so this just adds
don't care to the implementation. and so
we do that for all states in our PC in the
states we can, can be in just before, just
while looking at the ith character. If we
have a match then we put the next states
into a match. So now, what we have to do
is follow the, epsilon transitions from
match. So now, we build another DFS which
gives us marks all the states that you
could reach by starting with any of the
states in match. and now when we build a
new PC, we'll just set PC to a new, new
bag, and put all the marked states for
that search. So, those are all the ones
that you could get to via epsilon
transitions right after a match, and put
that in the PC. Now. we have a new PC. and
we've r ead the ith, character and we go
to the i plus first character, and simply
continue. so, when we're done with all of
the text then we can test if we made it to
the accept state. that is, if any of the
states in our current set of states is the
accept state, we return true. and if we
didn't get to the accept state after all
of that, we return false. A very compact
code that takes advantage of our
implementation of reachability for
digraphs in a, a reasonable way to
simulate the operation of an NFA by
keeping track of all reachable states. so,
what about the N analysis? Well it's easy
to see that the not difficult to see that
if our text is N-character and we have an
M-character pattern. the worst that can
happen is that we take time proportional
to M times N. and that's just because for
everyone of the characters we have a set
of states, a set of all possible states.
And we iterate through that set of
possible states a few times. we even run
DFS on it, but that's linear. and there's
the extra point that the number of edges
that we have is less than 3M. No node has
more than three edges leaving it. So the
total amount of time for each character is
proportional to M and there's
N-characters, so there are any
proportional to M times N. So, that's the,
the cost of the simulation. Of course a
lot of times, the size of the set of
states is much smaller than that. so in
many real world problems, it's closer to
linear. that's NFA simulation.
