Now, we'll look at a couple of more
interesting examples that show how useful
reductions are for designing new
algorithms. so again that's the basic
definition and the implication of the
definition is that in order to design an
algorithm for a problem X. we can go ahead
and use some existing algorithm for Y. And
here's the, some of the many examples that
we've already seen in this course finding
the median and element distinctness. I
just talked about the scheduling problem,
reduces the topological sort. we saw that
in the shortest paths lecture. Also, the
arbitrage problem of is, involves building
a, a, a digraph for currency exchange. we
reduce that to shortest paths. and there's
several other examples. So, it's an
important and useful technique. so that
just the general mentality is, if I know
how to solve Y, I have a new problem. can
I use that to solve X? and every
programmer does that and saying, well,
I've got some code that solves Y or I've
got a library function that does Y. Can I
use that to solve X? That's reduction. So,
our first example is convex hull problem
that we looked at briefly back in the
sorting lecture. And, and that's where
your given endpoints in the plane and what
you want to do is, I identify the points
on the periphery, these, that's called
extreme points on the convex hull. you can
imagine a, a bunch of points on a big
range and a rancher wants to use the
cheapest amount of fence to surround them
all. And so it's a minimum parameter way
to draw a line that surrounds all the
points, it's a convex hull. and there's
many other ways to define it. That doesn't
seem to be all that closely related to
sorting but it's actually true that convex
hull reduces the sorting. that is if you
can sort, you can compute the convex hull.
And that's an algorithm known as the
Graham scan algorithm that we'll look at
in the next slide. the cost of a convex
hull is the cost of the sort and log N
plus the cost of the reduction. And that
Graham scan algorithm just uses linear
time. So, with sorting we get an N log N
algorithm for convex hull, which is a nice
algorithm design technique. And this is a
diagram of the, that shows the Graham scan
algorithm we which we won't go through in
detail but it's pretty intuitive. what we
do is we pick a point one over in the
corner and maybe the smallest Y coordinate
point. and then, sort the points by polar
angle swept out by that coordinate. so, if
you think of a, of a line sweeping through
and just picking out the points by polar
angles centered at that point, then we get
the points in order along this polygon.
And because we're doing it by polar angle
the lines don't intersect. It's a simple
polygon which with no intersecting lines.
And then, the Graham scan algorithm is
just to proceed along, over here, it
proceeds along that polygon. but if you
ever come to a point where you are going
to make a right turn or clockwise turn you
throw out the points that would have
caused that. So, in this case, this point
will cause us to make a right turn so we
throw it out. And now, our most recent
points are these three. And again, that's
a right point, so we throw that one out
and it puts us in this position here and
so, and the idea is that any point that
would cause a right-hand turn is not going
to be on the convex hull. It's going to
kind of a, we kind of have a proof that
the points inside just buys into the fact
that it would make us do a right turn. So,
we throw this one out and that leaves that
and then we go here. And that would be a
right turn on the, on our path. So throw
that one out, and we're here. Another one
and continuing in this way. when we
finally get back to the beginning we've
computed the points on the convex hull.
So, the cost of the algorithm is the cost
of the sort which is N log N. But the cost
of the scan is only linear. Every point
only gets considered once. that's an
excellent example of a reduction to get a
new algorithm. If you didn't have the fast
sort this wouldn't be so effective. here's
another example of a reduction we
implemented and looked at short est path
for digraphs. what about shortest paths on
undirected graphs? It still makes sense.
That's why I have a weighted undirected
graph with non-negative weights and I'm
going to find the shortest path from a
given vortex, source vortex, S2 or a given
target vortex T, and if it's the lowest
weight path from S to T. so how are we
gonna solve that one? We have shortest
path that works for digraphs. Well, if we
just replace each undirected edge by two
directed edges, then the shortest path
algorithm for digraphs works. in fact,
with our graph representation it's just
running that algorithm cuz our undirected
graphs are represented with the edges
going in both directions so they're
actually represented as digraphs. and
again, what's the cost? the cost this time
is the cost of pre-processing to just take
the graph in its undirected form and
convert it to directed form and then the
cost of shortest pass of the digraph is E
log V. So that gives us an algorithm for
shortest path in undirected graphs. Notice
that it doesn't work if there's negative
weights in the undirected graph, because
the reduction creates a negative cycle. it
is possible to find shortest paths in
these graphs but you need a, a much more
sophisticated algorithm to do it. so just
continuing in this way we've considered
quite a few problems that involved
reductions. so, I just talked about
finding median and element distinctness in
convex hull reducing to sorting. and there
were a bunch of other problems that we
considered as exercises when we talked
about applications to applications of
sorting. So, application of sorting really
means problem reduces to sorting. so sure
as processing time scheduling and, and,
and lots of other problems that are
reduced to sorting. and in the graph world
we looked at some pretty complicated
problems. Arbitrage we looked at a
parallel, parallel scheduling or CPM
method and I just talked about shortest
paths and undirected graphs and those all
reduced to shortest paths and digraphs. we
looked at problems that reduced to max
flow bipartite matching, reduces to max
flow and the linear program problem that
we'll talk about next time, actually both
max flow and shortest paths and digraphs
reduce to linear program programming. So
this is a pretty diversed set of problems
that all through the set of reduction we
found ways to solve them using some core
kinds of problem solving models. And so
reduction is an extremely important
algorithm design technique.
