Today, we're, we're going to look at the
vector graphs, which is another graph
processing model that's very useful in
many applications.
It's very similar to the undirected grpah
model that we looked at last time, but
there are some really profound
differences.
After introducing the concept and looking
at the API, we'll look at three important
classic algorithms for processing directed
graphs.
The intro, introduction has to deal with
just explaining the concept and seeing
what it does to our graph processing
problems like the ones that we talked
about for undirected graphs last time.
So, the idea isn't that the edges now have
direction.
A directed graph or a digraph is a set of
vertices that are connected pairwise by
directed edges.
So, it's list of pairs of vertices where
the order of the pair matters.
So, an edge we say an edge goes from one
vertex to another one. whereas, in
undirected graphs, we just talked about
connections.
When we're processing such graphs or
travelling around them, we have to follow
edges in the given direction.
So, for example, if we talk about a path
in the diagram there's, it looks like
there's a connection between two and zero,
but it only goes from two to zero.
If you want to go from zero to two, you
have to follow the edges in direction
going from zero to five to four and then
to two.
In the directed graph, in this digraph you
can see two directly from zero.
Similarly, a directed cycle follows the
edges around the direction to get back to
the original vertex. also vertices have
in-degree and out-degree in digraphs.
And the out-degree, obviously, is the
number of variables leaving the vertex and
in the in-degree is the number of
variables coming into the vertex.
Those are the basic definitions. let's
look at a couple of applications one
obvious one is road networks where we put
a vertex according to intersection in an
edge for roads.
And we look at a situation where most,
where the roads are one way or can be one
way.
So, if you've driven in lower Manhattan,
you're very familiar with this map, which
has lots of one-way streets.
And it's not always clear how to get from
one place to another.
You can have some two-way streets that
have edges in both directions.
But with digraphs, we allow the
abstraction of one-way streets.
Here's another more abstract example.
This is the political blogosphere with
connections.
If, If blogs have links to one another as
you can see, most of the links go from
blue to blue or from red to red.
Although there are some orange links that
go from blue to red and a few purple ones
that go from red to blue.
And this gives some insight to the in the
political blogosphere at least in 2004.
Here's another one.
This is a study of the crash in 2008, and
it was a graph that showed the structure
of banks lending to one another.
An edge corresponds from an overnight loan
and a vertex corresponds to the bank.
And from studying this diagram, experts
can see how the banks divided into groups
and were therefore vulnerable in these
groups and we'll look at a more detailed
definitions of how these groups are
defined a little later on.
This is just an example of the use of a
digraph.
And it's a digraph, the bank.
One bank lends money to another, that's
not the same as the banks being connected,
in some as in an undirected graph.
The direction really matters.
This is another one from logic where the
vertices correspond to Boolean variables
and the edges correspond to implication.
And people use graphs like this to study
in, in logical verification, and also
studying electric circuits.
Electric circuits themselves can be
diagraphs where circuit elements have
input and output.
And so, the edge of course takes the
output of one element to the input of
another.
Trying to understand the behavior of such
a circuit involves processing a digraph.
Here's another abstraction so-called
wordnet graph.
Where vertices correspond in what is
called synsets and edges correspond to
hypernym relationships where a, a word is
an instance of another one.
So, there's a lot of different events like
a miracle or human activity and so forth.
And graphs of this type are very useful in
studying applications involving meanings,
meanings in human languages.
Here's a famous one.
General McChrystal said that once we
understand this graph the war in
Afghanistan will be over.
So, with all these types of applications
and there's many, many others just as with
graph processing.
Now, the digraph as it, as it is modeled
distinct from graph processing is
important.
There's many direct applications where we
have connections between objects but the
direction of the connection matters.
So, what about digraph processing
algorithms.
Well, we're going to look at many problems
that are very similar to the ones that we
looked at for undirected graphs.
But you can see that they are going to be
a bit more complicated.
Even a human has trouble looking at a
diagraph trying to figure out a simple
problem like, is there a path from s to t
in this, in this diagraph.
Seems like there's quite a few
possibilities to consider to convince
yourself whether or not there's a path.
And for the huge diagraphs examples that I
looked at before obviously we're going to
need a computer program.
And we're going to have a bit of a
challenge figuring what's going on.
Of course, you might want to know the
shortest directed path from s to t for
example, if you are driving around lower
Manhattan and certainly, I want to have a
solution to that problem.
Then, there's another problem called the
topological sort problem which is a
general model that's useful in all kinds
of applications where were scheduling
events that involve precedence
constraints.
In the graph obstruction or the digraph
obstruction, it amounts to the problem of
trying to draw the digraph so that all the
edges point up.
That's called topological sorting.
And then, connectivity is more complicated
for digraphs than for undirected graphs.
There's the concept of strong
connectivity, which means for any given
pair of vertices u and v, you want to know
is there going to be a directed path from
u to v and another directed path from v to
u.
That's a much more complicated problem
than connectivity in undirected graphs.
And, a generalization of, of that or a
query related to strong connectivities,
so-called transitive closure.
And for that, you just want to be able
answer the query given vertices v and w as
their path from w to v, a transitive
closure.
And actually, you're familiar with the web
is a gigantic directed graph.
If there's a link from page a to page b,
B, that's a directed edge.
And digraph processing is used in famous
page rank algorithm to determine the
importance of a web page.
Those are just a couple of examples of
digraph processing problems that introduce
the idea.
